Compatibility guide for Kotlin 2.1.0 (#4540)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: docs/topics/compatibility-guides/compatibility-guide-21.md

> - 2.2.0: raise the warning to an error for incompatible `copy()` usages
> - 2.3.0: the `copy()` function defaults to the visibility of the primary constructor

## Tools

### Deprecate KotlinCompilationOutput#resourcesDirProvider

> **Issue**: [KT-69255](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-69255)
>
> **Component**: Gradle
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: The `KotlinCompilationOutput#resourcesDirProvider` field is deprecated.
> Use `KotlinSourceSet.resources` to add additional resource directories instead.
> 
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: `KotlinCompilationOutput#resourcesDirProvider` is deprecated

### Deprecate registerKotlinJvmCompileTask(taskName, moduleName) function

> **Issue**: [KT-69927](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-69927)
>
> **Component**: Gradle
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: The `registerKotlinJvmCompileTask(taskName, moduleName)` function is deprecated
> in favor of the new `registerKotlinJvmCompileTask(taskName, compilerOptions, explicitApiMode)` function, which now accepts `KotlinJvmCompilerOptions`.

> > This allows you to set compiler options directly when creating a new JVM compilation task.

Reviewer: Sounds good

>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: the `registerKotlinJvmCompileTask(taskName, moduleName)` function is deprecated

### Deprecate registerKaptGenerateStubsTask(taskName) function

> **Issue**: [KT-70383](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-70383)
>
> **Component**: Gradle
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: The `registerKaptGenerateStubsTask(taskName)` function is deprecated.
> Use the new `registerKaptGenerateStubsTask(compileTask, kaptExtension, explicitApiMode)` function instead.

> > This new version allows `KotlinJvmCompile` tasks to be directly connected to `KaptGenerateStubsTask`, making it possible to apply `KotlinJvmCompilerOptions` directly within the task.

Author: So how about 🤔 :
This new version allows you to link values as conventions from the relevant `KotlinJvmCompile` task, enabling `KotlinJvmCompilerOptions` to be applied directly within `KaptGenerateStubsTask`.

> > This new version allows `KotlinJvmCompile` tasks to be directly connected to `KaptGenerateStubsTask`, making it possible to apply `KotlinJvmCompilerOptions` directly within the task.

Author: I like it let's go with that! 👍

>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: the `registerKaptGenerateStubsTask(taskName)` function is deprecated

### Deprecate KotlinTopLevelExtension and KotlinTopLevelExtensionConfig interfaces

> **Issue**: [KT-71602](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-71602)
>
> **Component**: Gradle
>
> **Incompatible change type**: behavioral
>
> **Short summary**: `KotlinTopLevelExtension` and `KotlinTopLevelExtensionConfig` interfaces are deprecated in favor of a new `KotlinTopLevelExtension` interface.
> This interface merges `KotlinTopLevelExtensionConfig`, `KotlinTopLevelExtension`, and `KotlinProjectExtension`
> to provide a clearer API hierarchy, and official access to JVM toolchain and compiler properties.
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: the `KotlinTopLevelExtension` and `KotlinTopLevelExtensionConfig` interfaces are deprecated

### Remove kotlin-compiler-embeddable from build runtime dependencies

> **Issue**: [KT-61706](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-61706)
>
> **Component**: Gradle
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: The `kotlin-compiler-embeddable` dependency is removed from the runtime in Kotlin Gradle Plugin (KGP).

> > Required modules are now included directly in KGP artifacts, with a version limit of 2.0 to support compatibility with Gradle versions below 8.2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Required modules are now included directly in KGP artifacts, with a Kotlin language version limit of 2.0 to support compatibility with Gradle Kotlin runtime in versions below 8.2.
```

>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: report a warning on using `kotlin-compiler-embeddable`
> - 2.2.0: raise the warning to an error

### Hide compiler symbols from the Kotlin Gradle Plugin API

> **Issue**: [KT-70251](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-70251)
>
> **Component**: Gradle
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: Compiler module symbols bundled within the Kotlin Gradle Plugin (KGP), such as `KotlinCompilerVersion`,
> are hidden from the public API to prevent unintended access in build scripts.
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: report a warning on accessing these symbols
> - 2.2.0: raise the warning to an error

### Support for multiple stability configuration files

> **Issue**: [KT-68345](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-68345)
>
> **Component**: Gradle
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>

> > **Short summary**: The `stabilityConfigurationFile` property in the Compose compiler options is deprecated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Short summary**: The `stabilityConfigurationFile` property in the Compose extension is deprecated
```

The Compose compiler plugin options are not changed - it is only change in Compose Gradle plugin extension

>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.0.0: report a deprecation warning for nullability mismatches in Java methods with stricter type arguments
> - 2.1.0: raise the warning to an error

### Report implicit usages of inaccessible types

> **Issue**: [KTLC-3](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KTLC-3)
>
> **Component**: Core language
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: The compiler now reports usages of inaccessible types in function literals and type arguments,
> preventing compilation and runtime failures caused by incomplete type information.
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.0.0: report warnings for function literals with parameters or receivers of inaccessible non-generic types and for types with inaccessible type argument; report errors for
> function literals with parameters or receivers of inaccessible generic types and for types with inaccessible generic type arguments in specific scenarios
> - 2.1.0: raise warnings to errors for function literals with parameters and receivers of inaccessible non-generic types
> - 2.2.0: raise warnings to errors for types with inaccessible type arguments

> ## Standard library

Reviewer 2: Discussed.
Given the limited time remaining until the release announcement, let's:
* Copy relevant sections from the previous compatibility guides. I found those two.
* Add a section for each of the three deprecations (toUpperCase/lowerCase, appendln, freezing API) included in the What's New document. A section for appendln has already been added. The sections for the other two are TBD.
* Add somewhere link to https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-71628

> ## Standard library

Reviewer 2: Apologies for the late request for changes to the guide.

## Basic terms

In this document we introduce several kinds of compatibility:

- _source_: source-incompatible change stops code that used to compile fine (without errors or warnings) from compiling
  anymore
- _binary_: two binary artifacts are said to be binary-compatible if interchanging them doesn't lead to loading or
  linkage errors
- _behavioral_: a change is said to be behavioral-incompatible if the same program demonstrates different behavior
  before and after applying the change

Remember that those definitions are given only for pure Kotlin. Compatibility of Kotlin code from the other languages
perspective
(for example, from Java) is out of the scope of this document.

## Language

<!--
### Title

> **Issue**: [KT-NNNNN](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-NNNNN)
>
> **Component**: Core language
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**:
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: report a warning
> - 2.2.0: raise the warning to an error
-->

### Deprecate appendln in favor of appendLine

> **Issue**: [KTLC-27](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KTLC-27)
>

> > **Component**: Core language

Reviewer 3: It's a change in the standard library, see "Type of change" in the issue

Reviewer 4: +1, Also should be in the "Standard library" section

>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: `StringBuilder.appendln()` is deprecated in favor of `StringBuilder.appendLine()`.
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>

> > - 1.4: the `appendln()` function is deprecated; report a warning on use

Reviewer 4: Better to use consistent number of version components

> it now triggers a compilation error. This resolves runtime crashes caused by missing setters in such cases.
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: report a warning (or an error in progressive mode) when a class inherits an abstract `var` property from an interface and a `val` property with the same name from a superclass
> - 2.2.0: raise the warning to an error

### Report error when accessing uninitialized enum entries

> **Issue**: [KT-68451](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-68451)
>
> **Component**: Core language
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: The compiler now reports an error when uninitialized enum entries are accessed during enum class or entry initialization.
> This aligns behavior with member property initialization rules, preventing runtime exceptions and ensuring consistent logic.
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: report an error when accessing uninitialized enum entries

### Change Map.Entry behavior to fail-fast on structural modification

> **Issue**: [KTLC-23](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KTLC-23)
>

> > **Component**: Core language

Reviewer 3: Also, it's a change in the standard library

>
> **Incompatible change type**: behavioral
>
> **Short summary**: Accessing a `Map.Entry` key-value pair after its associated map has been structurally modified now throws a `ConcurrentModificationException`.
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>

> > - 2.1.0: report a warning
> > - 2.2.0: raise the warning to an error

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> - 2.1.0: start throwing an exception when a map structural modification is detected
```

> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: The compiler now reports usages of inaccessible types in function literals and type arguments,
> preventing compilation and runtime failures caused by incomplete type information.
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.0.0: report warnings for function literals with parameters or receivers of inaccessible non-generic types and for types with inaccessible type argument; report errors for
> function literals with parameters or receivers of inaccessible generic types and for types with inaccessible generic type arguments in specific scenarios
> - 2.1.0: raise warnings to errors for function literals with parameters and receivers of inaccessible non-generic types
> - 2.2.0: raise warnings to errors for types with inaccessible type arguments

## Standard library

### Remove kotlin-stdlib-common artifacts in compiler tests

> **Issue**: [KT-62159](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-62159)
>
> **Component**: kotlin-stdlib
>
> **Incompatible change type**: binary
>
> **Short summary**: The JAR file published under `org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-stdlib-common` is deprecated, with `.klib` files replacing it as the standard format.

> > The legacy `kotlin-stdlib-common` artifacts built with `kotlin-platform-common` and `enableCompatibilityMetadataVariant` are removed in compiler tests.

Reviewer 4: Hm, I'm not sure that our compiler tests are relevant to the users.

Reviewer 4: To summarize the change: we're removing compatibility JAR with common multiplatform declarations metadata from stdlib artifacts `kotlin-stdlib` and `kotlin-stdlib-common`.

Author: Thank you - I removed the part about the compiler tests.
I pushed the new version like:

> The `kotlin-stdlib-common` and `kotlin-stdlib` JAR artifacts are deprecated and replaced by `.klib` files as the standard format for common multiplatform declarations metadata.

Reviewer 4: That sound more scary than it is in reality. Before that we published three JARs under `kotlin-stdlib` coordinates:
- `kotlin-stdlib.jar` - the main artifact for JVM,
- `kotlin-stdlib-all.jar` - with the declarations from all common source sets of the standard library in the modern format,
- `kotlin-stdlib-common.jar` with legacy multiplatform declarations metadata from the commonMain source set only

With this change we stop publishing the last one.

Author: Thank you - clarified in the text that it only affects `kotlin-stdlib-common.jar` artifact

warnings, this document summarizes them all, providing a complete reference for migration from Kotlin 2.0 to Kotlin 2.1.

## Basic terms

In this document we introduce several kinds of compatibility:

- _source_: source-incompatible change stops code that used to compile fine (without errors or warnings) from compiling
  anymore
- _binary_: two binary artifacts are said to be binary-compatible if interchanging them doesn't lead to loading or
  linkage errors
- _behavioral_: a change is said to be behavioral-incompatible if the same program demonstrates different behavior
  before and after applying the change

Remember that those definitions are given only for pure Kotlin. Compatibility of Kotlin code from the other languages
perspective
(for example, from Java) is out of the scope of this document.

## Language

<!--
### Title

> **Issue**: [KT-NNNNN](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-NNNNN)
>
> **Component**: Core language
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**:
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: report a warning
> - 2.2.0: raise the warning to an error
-->

> ### Change data class copy() function visibility to match private constructor

Reviewer 3: I propose removing this item, as it hasn't been approved by the Language Committee yet. We started emitting warnings, which is true, but we still haven't agreed on the actual deprecation cycle: https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KTLC-22/LC-Change-default-visibility-of-generated-copy-method-to-match-primary-constructor-visibility

>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: report a warning
> - 2.2.0: raise the warning to an error

### Changes in K2 smart cast propagation

> **Issue**: [KTLC-34](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KTLC-34)
>
> **Component**: Core language
>
> **Incompatible change type**: behavioral
>
> **Short summary**: K2 changes the behavior of smart cast propagation, introducing bidirectional propagation of type
> information for inferred variables, like `val x = y`. Explicitly typed variables, such as `val x: T = y`,
> no longer propagate type information, ensuring stricter adherence to declared types.
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: change the behavior in K2; K1 remains unaffected

### Correct the handling of member-extension property overrides in Java subclasses

> **Issue**: [KTLC-35](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KTLC-35)
>
> **Component**: Core language
>
> **Incompatible change type**: behavioral
>
> **Short summary**: The getter for member-extension properties overridden by Java subclasses is now hidden in the subclass's scope,
> aligning its behavior with regular Kotlin properties.
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>

> > - 2.1.0: enable the new behavior in K2; K1 remains unaffected

Reviewer 3: I believe we can remove K1 part and just say "enable the new behavior in 2.1"

### Correct visibility alignment for getters and setters of var properties overriding a protected val

> **Issue**: [KTLC-36](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KTLC-36)
>
> **Component**: Core language
>
> **Incompatible change type**: binary
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>

> > - 2.1.0: enforce consistent visibility for both getters and setters in K2; K1 remains unaffected

Reviewer 3: The same about K2/K1, there's only K2, we can always use just versions

### Forbid access to private operator functions in public inline functions

> **Issue**: [KTLC-71](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KTLC-71)
>
> **Component**: Core language
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: Private operator functions such as `getValue()`, `setValue()`, `provideDelegate()`, `hasNext()`, and `next()` can no longer be accessed in public inline functions
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.0.0: report a deprecation warning for accessing private operator functions in public inline functions
> - 2.1.0: raise the warning to an error

### Prohibit passing invalid arguments to invariant parameters annotated with @UnsafeVariance

> **Issue**: [KTLC-72](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KTLC-72)
>
> **Component**: Core language
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: The compiler now ignores `@UnsafeVariance` annotations during type checks, enforcing stricter type safety for invariant type parameters.
> This prevents invalid calls that rely on `@UnsafeVariance` to bypass expected type checks.
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>

> > - 2.1.0: activate the new behavior in K2

Reviewer 3: The same, no need to mention K2

- _behavioral_: a change is said to be behavioral-incompatible if the same program demonstrates different behavior
  before and after applying the change

Remember that those definitions are given only for pure Kotlin. Compatibility of Kotlin code from the other languages
perspective
(for example, from Java) is out of the scope of this document.

## Language

### Change the typeOf() function behavior on Kotlin/Native

> **Issue**: [KT-70754](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-70754)
>
> **Component**: Core language
>
> **Incompatible change type**: behavioral
>
> **Short summary**: The behavior of the `typeOf()` function on Kotlin/Native is aligned with Kotlin/JVM
> to ensure consistency across platforms. 
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: align the `typeOf()` function behavior on Kotlin/Native

### Prohibit exposing types through type parameters' bounds

> **Issue**: [KT-69653](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-69653)
>
> **Component**: Core language
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: Exposing types with lower visibility through type parameter bounds is now prohibited,
> addressing inconsistencies in type visibility rules.

> > This change ensures that bounds on type parameters follow the same visibility rules as classes, preventing issues like IR validation errors in JVM.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
> This change ensures that bounds on type parameters follow the same visibility rules as classes, preventing issues like IR validation errors in the JVM.
```

>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: throw an exception when a map structural modification is detected

## Tools

### Deprecate KotlinCompilationOutput#resourcesDirProvider

> **Issue**: [KT-69255](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-69255)
>
> **Component**: Gradle
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: The `KotlinCompilationOutput#resourcesDirProvider` field is deprecated.
> Use `KotlinSourceSet.resources` in your Gradle build script instead to add additional resource directories.
> 
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: `KotlinCompilationOutput#resourcesDirProvider` is deprecated

### Deprecate registerKotlinJvmCompileTask(taskName, moduleName) function

> **Issue**: [KT-69927](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-69927)
>
> **Component**: Gradle
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: The `registerKotlinJvmCompileTask(taskName, moduleName)` function is deprecated
> in favor of the new `registerKotlinJvmCompileTask(taskName, compilerOptions, explicitApiMode)` function, which now accepts `KotlinJvmCompilerOptions`.

> > This allows you to pass a `compilerOptions` instance, typically from an extension or target, with values used as conventions for the task’s options.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
> This allows you to pass a `compilerOptions` instance, typically from an extension or target, with values used as conventions for the task's options.
```

> **Issue**: [KT-70251](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-70251)
>
> **Component**: Gradle
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: Compiler module symbols bundled within the Kotlin Gradle Plugin (KGP), such as `KotlinCompilerVersion`,
> are hidden from the public API to prevent unintended access in build scripts.
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: report a warning on accessing these symbols
> - 2.2.0: raise the warning to an error

### Add support for multiple stability configuration files

> **Issue**: [KT-68345](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-68345)
>
> **Component**: Gradle
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: The `stabilityConfigurationFile` property in the Compose extension is deprecated
> in favor of a new `stabilityConfigurationFiles` property, which allows specifying multiple configuration files.
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: `stabilityConfigurationFile` property is deprecated

### Remove deprecated platform plugin IDs

> **Issue**: [KT-65565](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-65565)
>
> **Component**: Gradle
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>

> > **Short summary**: support for these platform plugin IDs have been removed:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
> **Short summary**: Support for these platform plugin IDs have been removed:
```

> [//]: # (title: Compatibility guide for Kotlin 2.1)

Reviewer 4: A related question: would it be possible to link the compatibility guide from the What's new page? (as we did in 1.9 and before)

Author: Hi Ilya - I asked the team - we'll link to it! 👍

> - 2.2.0: raise the warning to an error

### Prohibit inheriting an abstract var property alongside a val property with the same name

> **Issue**: [KT-58659](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-58659)
>
> **Component**: Core language
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: If a class inherits an abstract `var` property from an interface and a `val` property with the same name from a superclass,
> it now triggers a compilation error. This resolves runtime crashes caused by missing setters in such cases.
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: report a warning (or an error in progressive mode) when a class inherits an abstract `var` property from an interface and a `val` property with the same name from a superclass
> - 2.2.0: raise the warning to an error

### Report error when accessing uninitialized enum entries

> **Issue**: [KT-68451](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-68451)
>
> **Component**: Core language
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: The compiler now reports an error when uninitialized enum entries are accessed during enum class or entry initialization.

> > This aligns behavior with member property initialization rules, preventing runtime exceptions and ensuring consistent logic.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> This aligns the behavior with member property initialization rules, preventing runtime exceptions and ensuring consistent logic.
```

>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: report an error when accessing uninitialized enum entries

> ### Changes in K2 smart cast propagation

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
### Change K2 smart cast propagation
```

Reviewer 6: I see previous headings are verb-oriented, the same for previous compatibility guides.

Author: There are a few examples where it deviates from being verb-oriented - I think it makes it less severe

> **Issue**: [KTLC-34](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KTLC-34)
>
> **Component**: Core language
>
> **Incompatible change type**: behavioral
>

> > **Short summary**: K2 changes the behavior of smart cast propagation, introducing bidirectional propagation of type

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> **Short summary**: K2 changes the behavior of smart cast propagation by introducing bidirectional propagation of type
```

> information for inferred variables, like `val x = y`. Explicitly typed variables, such as `val x: T = y`,
> no longer propagate type information, ensuring stricter adherence to declared types.
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: enable the new behavior

### Correct the handling of member-extension property overrides in Java subclasses

> **Issue**: [KTLC-35](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KTLC-35)
>
> **Component**: Core language
>
> **Incompatible change type**: behavioral
>
> **Short summary**: The getter for member-extension properties overridden by Java subclasses is now hidden in the subclass's scope,

> > aligning its behavior with regular Kotlin properties.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> aligning its behavior with that of regular Kotlin properties.
```

>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: enable the new behavior

> ### Correct visibility alignment for getters and setters of var properties overriding a protected val

Reviewer 6: Aren't we missing a short summary here?

Author: title summarizes it well - so no short summary required

> **Issue**: [KTLC-36](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KTLC-36)
>
> **Component**: Core language
>
> **Incompatible change type**: binary
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: enforce consistent visibility for both getters and setters in K2; K1 remains unaffected

### Raise severity of JSpecify nullability mismatch diagnostics to errors

> **Issue**: [KTLC-11](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KTLC-11)
>
> **Component**: Core language
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>

> > **Short summary**: Nullability mismatches from `org.jspecify.annotations`, such as `@NonNull`, `@Nullable`, and `@NullMarked` are treated as errors instead of warnings,

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> **Short summary**: Nullability mismatches from `org.jspecify.annotations`, such as `@NonNull`, `@Nullable`, and `@NullMarked` are now treated as errors instead of warnings,
```

> enforcing stricter type safety for Java interoperability. To adjust the severity of these diagnostics, use the `-Xnullability-annotations` compiler option.
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>

> > - 1.6.0: report a warning for potential nullability mismatches

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> - 1.6.0: report warnings for potential nullability mismatches
```

> - 1.8.20: expand warnings to specific JSpecify annotations, including: `@Nullable`, `@NullnessUnspecified`, `@NullMarked`, and legacy annotations in `org.jspecify.nullness` (JSpecify 0.2 and earlier)
> - 2.0.0: add support for the `@NonNull` annotation

> > - 2.1.0: change default mode to strict  for JSpecify annotations, converting warnings into errors; use `-Xnullability-annotations=@org.jspecify.annotations:warning` or `-Xnullability-annotations=@org.jspecify.annotations:ignore` to override the default behavior

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> - 2.1.0: change default mode for JSpecify annotations to strict, converting warnings into errors; use `-Xnullability-annotations=@org.jspecify.annotations:warning` or `-Xnullability-annotations=@org.jspecify.annotations:ignore` to override the default behavior
```

Reviewer 6: Does "strict" require extra formatting? Italics, or even mono? 🤔

> ### Change overload resolution to prioritize extension functions over invoke calls in ambiguous cases

Reviewer 6: Aren't we missing a summary in this and the next 2 sections? Users may expect it as in the rest.

Author: title summarizes it well 👍

> **Issue**: [KTLC-37](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KTLC-37)
>
> **Component**: Core language
>
> **Incompatible change type**: behavioral
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>

> > - 2.1.0: change overload resolution to consistently prioritize extension functions over `invoke` calls for extension functions with matching signatures; this change applies only after recompilation and does not affect precompiled binaries

Reviewer 6: Actually, this sounds like the summary. Maybe you can take details from here and leave this explanation simpler.

### Prohibit returning nullable values from lambdas in SAM constructors of JDK function interfaces

> **Issue**: [KTLC-42](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KTLC-42)
>
> **Component**: Core language
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.0.0: report a deprecation warning for nullable return values in SAM constructors of JDK function interfaces
> - 2.1.0: enable the new behavior by default

### Correct handling of private members conflicting with public members in Kotlin/Native

> **Issue**: [KTLC-43](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KTLC-43)
>
> **Component**: Core language
>
> **Incompatible change type**: behavioral
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>

> > - 2.1.0: private functions and properties in Kotlin/Native no longer override or affect public members in a superclass, aligning with JVM behavior

Reviewer 6: Same as before

### Forbid access to private operator functions in public inline functions

> **Issue**: [KTLC-71](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KTLC-71)
>
> **Component**: Core language
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>

> > **Short summary**: Private operator functions such as `getValue()`, `setValue()`, `provideDelegate()`, `hasNext()`, and `next()` can no longer be accessed in public inline functions

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> **Short summary**: Private operator functions such as `getValue()`, `setValue()`, `provideDelegate()`, `hasNext()`, and `next()` can no longer be accessed in public inline functions.
```

>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: activate the new behavior

### Report nullability errors for error-level nullable arguments of warning-level Java types

> **Issue**: [KTLC-100](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KTLC-100)
>
> **Component**: Core language
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: The compiler now detects nullability mismatches in Java methods where a warning-level
> nullable type contains type arguments with stricter, error-level nullability.
> This ensures that previously ignored errors in type arguments are reported correctly.
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.0.0: report a deprecation warning for nullability mismatches in Java methods with stricter type arguments
> - 2.1.0: raise the warning to an error

### Report implicit usages of inaccessible types

> **Issue**: [KTLC-3](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KTLC-3)
>
> **Component**: Core language
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: The compiler now reports usages of inaccessible types in function literals and type arguments,
> preventing compilation and runtime failures caused by incomplete type information.
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>

> > - 2.0.0: report warnings for function literals with parameters or receivers of inaccessible non-generic types and for types with inaccessible type argument; report errors for

Reviewer 6: Would it work if we write something like:
2.0.0: reports both warnings and errors; warnings for function literals with parameters or receivers of inaccessible non-generic types and for types with inaccessible type argument; errors for function literals with parameters or receivers of inaccessible generic types and for types with inaccessible generic type arguments in specific scenarios

Author: I like this but I actually prefer explicitly separating warnings and errors into two clauses, I believe it makes it easier to follow

> - 2.1.0: raise warnings to errors for function literals with parameters and receivers of inaccessible non-generic types
> - 2.2.0: raise warnings to errors for types with inaccessible type arguments

## Standard library

### Deprecate locale-sensitive case conversion functions for Char and String

> **Issue**: [KT-43023](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-43023)
>
> **Component**: kotlin-stdlib
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: Among other Kotlin standard library APIs, locale-sensitive case conversion functions for `Char` and `String`, such as `Char.toUpperCase()` and `String.toLowerCase()`, are deprecated.
> Replace them with locale-agnostic alternatives like `String.lowercase()` or explicitly specify the locale for locale-sensitive behavior, such as `String.lowercase(Locale.getDefault())`.
>
> For a comprehensive list of deprecated Kotlin standard library APIs in Kotlin 2.1.0, see [KT-71628](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-71628).
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 1.4.30: introduce locale-agnostic alternatives as experimental API
> - 1.5.0: deprecate locale-sensitive case conversion functions with a warning

> > - 2.1.0: raise the warning to an error`

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
> - 2.1.0: raise the warning to an error
```

### Remove kotlin-stdlib-common JAR artifact

> **Issue**: [KT-62159](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-62159)
>
> **Component**: kotlin-stdlib
>
> **Incompatible change type**: binary
>
> **Short summary**:  The `kotlin-stdlib-common.jar` artifact, previously used for legacy multiplatform declarations metadata, is deprecated and replaced by `.klib` files as the standard format for common multiplatform declarations metadata.
> This change does not affect the main `kotlin-stdlib.jar` or `kotlin-stdlib-all.jar` artifacts.
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: deprecate and remove `kotlin-stdlib-common.jar` artifact

> ### Deprecate appendln in favor of appendLine

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### Deprecate appendln() in favor of appendLine()
```

> **Issue**: [KTLC-27](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KTLC-27)
>
> **Component**: kotlin-stdlib
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: `StringBuilder.appendln()` is deprecated in favor of `StringBuilder.appendLine()`.
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 1.4.0: the `appendln()` function is deprecated; report a warning on use
> - 2.1.0: raise the warning to an error

### Deprecate freezing-related APIs in Kotlin/Native

> > **Issue**: [KT-69545](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-NNNNN)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Issue**: [KT-69545](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-69545)
```

Author: nice catch - corrected it

>
> **Short summary**: Freezing-related APIs in Kotlin/Native, previously marked with the `@FreezingIsDeprecated` annotation, are now deprecated.
> This aligns with the new memory manager that removes the need for freezing objects for thread sharing.
> For migration details, see the [Kotlin/Native migration guide](native-migration-guide.md#update-your-code).
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 1.7.20: deprecate freezing-related APIs with a warning
> - 2.1.0: raise the warning to an error

### Change Map.Entry behavior to fail-fast on structural modification

> **Issue**: [KTLC-23](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KTLC-23)
>
> **Component**: kotlin-stdlib
>
> **Incompatible change type**: behavioral
>
> **Short summary**: Accessing a `Map.Entry` key-value pair after its associated map has been structurally modified now throws a `ConcurrentModificationException`.
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: throw an exception when a map structural modification is detected

## Tools

### Deprecate KotlinCompilationOutput#resourcesDirProvider

> **Issue**: [KT-69255](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-69255)
>
> **Component**: Gradle
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>

> > **Short summary**: The `KotlinCompilationOutput#resourcesDirProvider` field is deprecated.

Reviewer 6: Is there more context we could add here? For example:

The KotlinCompilationOutput#resourcesDirProvider field [FROM THE ...] is deprecated. Use KotlinSourceSet.resources [IN YOUR] to add additional resource directories instead.

Author: thank you 👍 I clarified that it's something in the build script!

### Deprecate registerKaptGenerateStubsTask(taskName) function

> **Issue**: [KT-70383](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-70383)
>
> **Component**: Gradle
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: The `registerKaptGenerateStubsTask(taskName)` function is deprecated.
> Use the new `registerKaptGenerateStubsTask(compileTask, kaptExtension, explicitApiMode)` function instead.
> This new version allows you to link values as conventions from the relevant `KotlinJvmCompile` task, ensuring both tasks are using the same set of options.
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: the `registerKaptGenerateStubsTask(taskName)` function is deprecated

### Deprecate KotlinTopLevelExtension and KotlinTopLevelExtensionConfig interfaces

> **Issue**: [KT-71602](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-71602)
>
> **Component**: Gradle
>
> **Incompatible change type**: behavioral
>
> **Short summary**: `KotlinTopLevelExtension` and `KotlinTopLevelExtensionConfig` interfaces are deprecated in favor of a new `KotlinTopLevelExtension` interface.
> This interface merges `KotlinTopLevelExtensionConfig`, `KotlinTopLevelExtension`, and `KotlinProjectExtension`

> > to provide a clearer API hierarchy, and official access to JVM toolchain and compiler properties.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> to streamline API hierarchy and provide official access to the JVM toolchain and compiler properties.
```

>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: the `KotlinTopLevelExtension` and `KotlinTopLevelExtensionConfig` interfaces are deprecated

### Remove kotlin-compiler-embeddable from build runtime dependencies

> **Issue**: [KT-61706](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-61706)
>
> **Component**: Gradle
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: The `kotlin-compiler-embeddable` dependency is removed from the runtime in Kotlin Gradle Plugin (KGP).

> > Required modules are now included directly in KGP artifacts, with a Kotlin language version limit of 2.0 to support compatibility with Gradle Kotlin runtime in versions below 8.2.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> Required modules are now included directly in KGP artifacts, with the Kotlin language version limited to 2.0 to support compatibility with Gradle Kotlin runtime in versions below 8.2.
```

>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: report a warning on using `kotlin-compiler-embeddable`
> - 2.2.0: raise the warning to an error

### Hide compiler symbols from the Kotlin Gradle Plugin API

> **Issue**: [KT-70251](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-70251)
>
> **Component**: Gradle
>
> **Incompatible change type**: source
>
> **Short summary**: Compiler module symbols bundled within the Kotlin Gradle Plugin (KGP), such as `KotlinCompilerVersion`,
> are hidden from the public API to prevent unintended access in build scripts.
>
> **Deprecation cycle**:
>
> - 2.1.0: report a warning on accessing these symbols
> - 2.2.0: raise the warning to an error

> ### Support for multiple stability configuration files

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
### Add support for multiple stability configuration files
```

Reviewer 6: For consistency with the verb-oriented form.
